Id: 1989
Title: gflags - a debugging story
Tags: programming,debugging,win32
Date: 2008-04-07T00:28:39-07:00
Format: Textile
--------------
I hate crashes that disappear when run under the debugger and I had one when
porting mupdf to Windows.

It helps to know that there's at least one reason for a changed behavior under
the debugger: it automatically triggers using debugging heap. While debugging
heap usually helps find problems, sometimes it does the opposite by changing
the details of memory allocation.

One helpful tool when debugging memory problems on Windows is gflags which can
enable page heap instrumentation for a given program. It works by putting each
allocation into a separate region of memory and putting a non-readable page
right after that. Also, upon freeing it makes the memory unreadable. That way
an overwrite of memory block while it's still being used or accessing the
memory after it was freed will cause immediate crash.

The downside is that using gflags uses much more memory. But in those days of
cheap gigabytes it's not a problem that can't be solved with a couple hundred
bucks.

Basic usage of gflags.exe is simple: @gflags /p /full /enable foo.exe@

From now on foo.exe will always be run with this instrumentation turned on. To
disable, do @gflags /p /disable foo.exe@


To see which programs have page heap enabled, do @gflags /p@. gflags offers many
other option and you can learn about them via @gflags /?@. If you run gflags
without any options, you'll get a (very confusing) GUI.

It worked like a charm. I got a crash on accessing freed memory and all I had
to do was to backtrack to where this memory was allocated to figure out the
problem.



