Id: 93002
Title: uISV stories
Tags: business
Date: 2010-05-02T14:31:33-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
Many people want to start a small software company and wonder if it can
work. Here is a list of small, bootstrapped companies that made it. A
proof positive it’s possible.

**1. GitHub**

Source:
<http://thechangelog.com/post/352878673/episode-0-1-0-chris-wanstrath-from-github>

Started by 3 people in October 07

Beta: January 08, people could sign up if had invite

Launch: April 08 - started charging, still had jobs

First hire by the end of 08

In October 08 started paying themselves a salary (started at 10% desired
salary). Reached desired salary in the beginning of 2009.

**2. Red Sweater software**

Source:

-   <http://blog.stackoverflow.com/2010/02/podcast-82/>
-   <http://www.red-sweater.com/blog/743/two-years-on-mars>
-   <http://www.red-sweater.com/blog/302/black-ink-10>
-   <http://www.red-sweater.com/blog/447/indie-fever>

Daniel Jalkut launched in 1999 (while still working at apple), quit
apple in 2002, became primary business in 2005. In 2007 moved from being
a full-time consultant to full-time developer.

Products: FlexTime \$19, MarsEdit \$30, Black Ink \$25, FastScripts
\$15, Clarion \$15

Black Ink (MacXword) acquired in Jan 2007, released in March 2007 as
Black Ink (ported from Java to Objective-C)

Mars Edit acquired in Feb 2007.

**3. Panic**

Source:

-   <http://www.red-sweater.com/blog/791/panics-lucky-13>
-   <http://www.panic.com/extras/audionstory/>

13 people in 2009

Products: Unison (\$30), Transmit (\$30), Coda (\$99), Desktastic
(\$13), CandyBar (\$29), Stattoo (\$13)

Released Transmit (first app) in 1999, 2 people then (Steven Frank,
Cabel Sasser)

**4. Flying Meat**

Source:

-   "http://gusmueller.com/blog/archives/2008/01/flying\_meat+*.html":http://gusmueller.com/blog/archives/2008/01/flying\_meat*+.html
-   <http://www.gusmueller.com/blog/archives/2005/12/25.html#1401>

Products: Acorn (\$50), VoodooPad (\$20), FlySketch (\$25)

Started by Gus Mueller. VoodooPad was the first commercial app released
in May 2003. Reached full-time salary in December 2004.

Hired first employee in Jan 2008.

**5. Pixelmator**

Products: Pixelmator (\$60)

Started in 2007 by 2 brothers, released Pixelmator in May 2007.
Profitable enough to take 3 months off at the end of 2009.

**6. Hamachi**

Source:

-   <http://www.bvckup.com/support/forums/topic_show.pl?tid=22>
-   <http://www.swapped.cc/hamachi/>
-   <http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=1046839>

Alex Pankratov started Hamachi (peer-to-peer VPN system) in early 2004,
launched in December 2004 and sold it to LogMeIn in 2006.

**7. Cocoatech**

Source:
<http://theappleblog.com/2009/06/25/interview-steve-gehrman-of-path-findercocoatech/>

Products: Path Finder (\$40)

Steve Gehrman started writing Path Finder as a way to learn Cocoa after
he was laid of from a dot-com job in late 2000. He wanted to get a job
as a Mac programmer but kept working on Path Finder during his job
search. At some point it became good enough to be sold and now it’s his
full-time job.
