Id: 98001
Title: Things I've learned this week
Date: 2010-04-24T01:26:24-07:00
Format: Textile
--------------
Things I've learned this week:
* using pt instead of px for CSS font-size property is a good way to have text that looks good on monitors with different DPIs. 8pt is a good value for small text
* typing takes a lot of time. I'm working on "JavaScript quick reference":/articles/jsref.html and it turns out that just typing all that text takes hours (and yes, I do touch type). No wonder books take years to write
* therefore shorthand notations are good. I started writing it html and it was painful. I improved things by writing small "python script":http://github.com/kjk/web-blog/blob/master/www/articles/jsrefgen.py that generates html from a more compact text format
* "etherpad":http://etherpad.com was open-sourced but pretty much abandoned by (now) google folks. There is an "active project":http://github.com/ether/pad that continues the work
* CSS: @overflow: auto;@ in a div makes it scrollable (instead, for example, overflowing it)
* HTML5: canvas element has @toDataURL()@ which returns PNG of itself. Can be used to add a way to easily export canvas data for external consumption e.g. @window.location = canvasEl.toDataURL()@ will navigate to a page that is the PNG file (which can then be save to disk or printed using browser's context menu). More sophisticated solution could dynamically add PNG to current page
* "Tornado":http://www.tornadoweb.org/ is a decent python web server framework

